{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\fscript\fprq2\fcharset0 Comic Sans MS;}{\f1\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Verdana;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\stylesheet{ Normal;}{\s1 heading 1;}{\s2 heading 2;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2509;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\s1\sb96\sa96\sl240\slmult1\qc\cf1\lang1033\b\f0\fs144 R\fs110 I\fs120 S\fs130 U\fs144 S\fs48\line\f1\fs36 THE ANYTHING RPG\par
\cf0\b0\f0\fs20 By S. John Ross\cf1\b\f2\fs48\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 Welcome to \b\i Risus: The Anything RPG,\b0\i0  a complete pen-and-paper roleplaying game! For some, \b\i Risus\b0\i0  is a handy \ldblquote emergency\rdblquote  RPG for spur-of-the-moment one-shots and rapid character creation. For others, it\rquote s a reliable campaign system supporting years of play. For others still, it\rquote s a strange little pamphlet with stick figures. For me, it\rquote s \i all three,\i0  and with this edition, \b\i Risus\b0\i0  celebrates not only two decades of existence, but two decades of \i life,\i0  bolstered by an enthusiastic global community devoted to expanding it, celebrating it, sharing it, and gaming with it.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Character Creation\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 The character \i Clich\'e9\i0  is the heart of \b\i Risus\b0\i0 . Clich\'e9s are shorthand for a kind of person, implying their skills, background, social role and more. The \ldblquote character classes\rdblquote  of the oldest RPGs are enduring Clich\'e9s: Wizard, Detective, Starpilot, Superspy. You can choose Clich\'e9s like those for your character, or devise something more outr\'e9, like Ghostly Pirate Cook, Fairy Godmother, Bruce Lee (for a character who does Bruce Lee \i stuff\i0 ) or Giant Monster Who Just Wants To Be Loved For His Macrame \endash  anything you can talk your GM into. With a \i very\i0  permissive GM, you could be \i all these at once. \i0 Each Clich\'e9 has a rating in \i dice\i0  (the ordinary six-sided kind). When your character\rquote s prowess as a Wizard, Starpilot or Bruce Lee is \i challenged,\i0  roll dice equal to the rating.  Three dice is \ldblquote professional.\rdblquote  One die is a putz. Six dice is ultimate mastery. A complete \b\i Risus\b0\i0  character looks like this:\par
\pard\hyphpar0\li86\ri144\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b\fs18 Grolfnar Vainsson the Viking\par
\pard\hyphpar0\li86\ri144\sb48\sl300\slmult1\fs16 Description: \b0 Tall, blond, and grinning. Likes to drink and fight and drink and chase Viking women and fight and sail the high seas and raid. Wants to write great sagas about himself.\b\par
Clich\'e9s: \b0 Viking (4), Gambler (3), Womanizer (2), Poet (1)\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1 To create Grolfnar, all we had to do was name him, describe him, and assign his Clich\'e9s. You get 10 dice to spend on Clich\'e9s, distributed however you like, on as many or few Clich\'e9s as you decide (but more than 10 would be odd, considering). The first Clich\'e9 listed for your character (\ldblquote Viking,\rdblquote  in Grolfnar\rquote s case) is his\i  Primary Clich\'e9 \i0\endash  the Clich\'e9 that most clearly expresses how your character \i sees himself. \i0 In general, new characters may not have Clich\'e9s rated higher than 4 dice, so Grolfnar\rquote s \ldblquote Viking\rdblquote  is maxed out for a beginning PC. Your GM might choose to expand, relax, or otherwise transmogrify such parameters for his game (ask if you\rquote re not sure).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Powers, Tools, and Power Tools\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 Each Clich\'e9 implies a lot about a character, most crucially including his likely \i abilities\i0  and \i equipment\i0 . If you\rquote re playing a Hirsute Barbarian (3), we can assume your character is comfortable with blades and battle. He\rquote s probably a climber, a runner, and all-night reveler. He probably owns at least one sturdy hand-weapon and (hopefully, mercifully) a complete loincloth. If you\rquote re playing a Psychic Schoolgirl (3), you probably have the power to sense (and be freaked-out by) the psychometric residue lingering at a murder scene, and might own a cute plushy backpack filled with school supplies. If you\rquote re playing a Roguish Space Pirate (3), you can do all kinds of piratey roguey space-things, and you probably own a raygun, and maybe a secondhand star freighter. When there\rquote s any doubt about your character\rquote s abilities or \ldblquote Tools of the Trade,\rdblquote  discuss it with your GM.\par
Tools of the Trade come \ldblquote free\rdblquote  as part of each Clich\'e9, but they\rquote re vulnerable to loss or damage, which can (sometimes) cripple or limit the power of the Clich\'e9. A Roguish Space Pirate, stripped of his star freighter, loses \i all\i0  ability to haul booty to distant suns \'85 while a Psychic Schoolgirl loses \i none\i0  of her ability to be freaked out by murder scenes if her plushy backpack is stolen. A Hirsute Barbarian (3), forced into a pit-fight without his trusty blade, can still rely on his bare hands, but he\rquote ll operate at \i half-dice\i0  \endash  a mere Hirsute Barbarian (2) \endash  until he\rquote s once again properly armed. The backpack-deprived Schoolgirl might face similar penalties when it\rquote s time to do her homework.\par
In the course of adventuring life, lucky explorers may discover enchanted and/or cutting-edge and/or otherwise \i special\i0  equipment. The most basic sort is called \i Bonus-Dice Gear\i0  (such items let you roll an extra die, or more, when using them) but there are other kinds of \ldblquote special\rdblquote  to be found, in the form of alternate game mechanics (\ldblquote With this experimental piloting software, you can reroll any 1s\rdblquote ), in-world powers (\ldblquote Only a Stradivarius can be used to seduce a Vampire Prince\rdblquote ) or even mixed benefits and restrictions (\ldblquote While wielding the Sword of Mercy, you always roll dice \i at least equal\i0  to your foe, but you \i must\i0  spare his life if you win.\rdblquote )\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 The Game System\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 Whenever anybody wants to do anything, \i and\i0  nobody\rquote s actively opposing it, \i and\i0  the GM doesn\rquote t think success would be automatic, the player rolls dice. If the total rolled beats (equals or exceeds) the Target Number set by the GM, success! If not, failure! Target numbers follow this scale:\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\li177\sb59\sl300\slmult1 5:\b0  A cinch. A challenge for a schmuck. Routine for a pro.\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\li86\sb30\sl300\slmult1 10:\b0  A challenge for a professional.\b\par
15:\b0  An Heroic challenge. For really inventive or tricky stunts.\b\par
20: \b0 A challenge for a Master. Nearly superhuman difficulty.\b\par
30:\b0  You\rquote ve GOT to be kidding. Actual superhuman difficulty.\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1 The Target Number depends on the Clich\'e9, and anyone can \i try\i0  anything. Crossing a chasm by swinging on a rope or vine would be child\rquote s play (automatic success!) for a Swashbuckler or a Lord of the Jungle, easy (Target 5) for a Pulp Archaeologist, and challenging but definitely doable (Target 10) for a Gymnast, Barbarian, or Cat-Burglar. Even a Wheelchair-Bound Eccentric Occultist could try it (Difficulty 15, but the wheelchair is lost unless the roll beats a 30)!\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\s2\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 The Combat System\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 In \b\i Risus\b0\i0 , \ldblquote combat\rdblquote  is any contest in which opponents jockey for position, make attacks, bring defenses to bear, and wear down their opponent to achieve victory. \i Literally or metaphorically.\i0  Examples of \ldblquote combat\rdblquote  include:\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\fi-144\li144\ri144\sb72\sl300\slmult1 Arguments:\b0  Combatants wielding logic, stubbornness and cheap rhetorical tricks to make their point.\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\fi-144\li144\ri144\sb14\sl300\slmult1 Horse-Racing:\b0  People on horses running around a dirty track, trying to get nowhere first.\b\par
Dogfights: \b0 Pilots in airplanes or spaceships trying to blow each other out of the sky.\b\par
Astral/Psychic Duels:\b0  Mystics/psionics looking bored or sleepy, but trying to rip each other\rquote s ego apart in the Otherworld.\b\par
Wizard\rquote s Duels:\b0  Sorcerers using strange magics, trying to outdo one another.\b\par
Dueling Banjos:\b0  Banjo players using strange melodies, trying to outdo one another.\b\par
Seduction:\b0  One (or more) characters trying to score with one (or more) other character(s) who is(are) trying to resist.\b\par
Courtroom Antics:\b0  Prosecution vs. Defense. The goal is victory. Justice is incidental.\b\par
Actual Regular Combat: \b0 People trying to injure or kill each other.\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1 The GM decides when a combat has begun. At that point, go around the table in rounds, and let each combatant make an attack in turn. What constitutes an \ldblquote attack\rdblquote  depends on the nature of the fight, but it should always be roleplayed (if dialogue is involved) or described in entertaining detail (if it\rquote s physical and/or dangerous and/or does/should involve contraceptives). The GM will determine what \i type\i0  of Clich\'e9 is appropriate for the fight. In a straightforward physical brawl, Clich\'e9s like Viking, Soldier, Swashbuckler, and Ernest Hemingway are equally appropriate, while Clich\'e9s like Hairdresser and Latin Lover are not.\par
Attacks must be directed at an opponent. Both parties in the attack (attacker and defender) roll against their chosen Clich\'e9. \i Low roll loses.\i0  Specifically, the low roller loses \i one of his Clich\'e9 dice\i0  for the remainder of the fight \endash  he\rquote s been weakened, worn down, demoralized or otherwise pushed one step towards defeat.\par
Eventually, one side will be left standing, and another will be left without dice. At this point, \i the winners decide the fate of the losers.\i0  In a physical fight or magical duel, the losers might be killed (or mercifully spared). In Courtroom Antics, the loser is sentenced by the judge, or fails to prosecute. In a Seduction, the loser gets either a cold shower or a warm evening, depending. While the GM will reject combat outcomes that make no sense in context (if you beat someone at tennis, you aren\rquote t \i normally\i0  allowed to decapitate them and drag their corpse through the city square), the spoils of victory are otherwise down to the choice of the victor.\par
You needn\rquote t use the same Clich\'e9 every round. If a Viking/Swashbuckler wants to lop heads one round, and switch to swinging on chandeliers the next, that\rquote s groovy, too. However, anytime a character has a Clich\'e9 worn down to zero dice in combat, he\rquote s been \i defeated,\i0  even if he has other Clich\'e9s left to play with.\par
Dice lost in combat are regained when the combat ends, at a healing rate determined by the GM (based on the nature of the attacks involved). If the combat was in vehicles (space fighters, mecha, wooden sailing ships) then the vehicles themselves are likely damaged, too, and must be repaired. Sometimes, healing takes not only time, but \i conditions\i0  specified by the GM (\ldblquote now that you\rquote ve been soundly defeated, you can\rquote t even \i look\i0  at your banjo until your girlfriend assuages your ego\rdblquote ).\par
There\rquote s no standard time or distance scale in \b\i Risus\b0\i0 ; everything depends on context. In a physical brawl, each round might represent just a few seconds \'85 while in a long-term fight between a married couple, each round might represent an entire day (Day One: Husband \ldblquote accidentally\rdblquote  burns Wife\rquote s favorite dress in the oven, Wife \ldblquote accidentally\rdblquote  feeds Drano to Husband\rquote s prize goldfish, and so on).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Inappropriate Clich\'e9s\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 As stated above, the GM determines what sort of Clich\'e9s are appropriate for the fight. Any Clich\'e9s left over are \i inappropriate.\i0  In a physical fight, Hairdresser is inappropriate. In a magical duel, Barbarian is inappropriate. \par
Inappropriate Clich\'e9s aren\rquote t \i forbidden\i0  from the fight. They can still be used to make attacks, \b\i provided the player roleplays or describes it in a really, really, really entertaining manner\b0\i0 . Furthermore, the attack must be \i plausible\i0  within the context of the combat, and the genre and tone that the GM has set for the game (making this kind of attack more often useful in very pulpy/swashbuckly games, or very silly ones).\par
All combat rules apply normally, with one exception: if an \i inappropriate\i0  Clich\'e9 wins a combat round versus an \i appropriate\i0  one, the losing player loses \i three\i0  dice, rather than one, from his Clich\'e9! The \ldblquote inappropriate\rdblquote  player takes no such risk, and loses only one die if he loses the round. Thus, a creative hairdresser is dangerous when cornered and attacked unfairly. Beware.\par
When in doubt, assume the aggressor determines the type of combat. If a wizard attacks a barbarian with magic, then it\rquote s a magical duel! If the barbarian attacks the mage with his sword, then it\rquote s physical combat! If the defender can come up with an entertaining use of his skills, he\rquote ll have the edge. It pays in many genres to be the defender! But \'85 if the wizard and barbarian \i both obviously want to fight,\i0  then \i both\i0  are aggressors, and it\rquote s \ldblquote fantasy combat,\rdblquote  where both swords and sorcery have \i equal\i0  footing.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\s2\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Teaming Up\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 Two or more characters may form a \i team\i0  in combat. For the duration of the team (usually the entire fight), they battle as a single unit, and may only be attacked as a single foe. There are two kinds of team: full-on \i Character Teams\i0  (for PCs, and sufficiently interesting NPCs) and \i Grunt-Squads\i0  (for nameless NPC hordes).\b\par
Grunt-Squads: \b0 This is just special effects. When a horde of 700 rat-skeletons attacks the PCs within the lair of the Wicked Necromancer (5), the GM probably won\rquote t feel like keeping track of 700 tiny skeletal sets of dice. Instead, he can declare them a Grunt Squad, fighting as a \i single foe:\i0  a Skeletal Rat-Horde (7). Mechanically, the Rat-Horde is the same as any single foe \endash  except it sometimes has more dice (as many as the GM cares to assign it). Grunt-Squads stick together as a team until they\rquote re defeated, at which point some survivors may scatter (though at least one will always remain to suffer whatever fate the victor decides). Taken to logical (or whimsical) extremes, an entire ship\rquote s crew, or even whole forests, dungeons, cities or nations might be represented by a single Clich\'e9.\b\par
Character Teams:\b0  When PCs (and/or NPCs worth the attention) form a team, the Team Leader is the character with the highest-ranking applicable Clich\'e9 (if there\rquote s a tie, the team must \i designate\i0  a Team Leader). Everybody rolls dice, but only the Team Leader\rquote s dice completely count. Other team-members contribute only their \i sixes\i0 , when they roll any.\par
Clich\'e9s joined in a team need not be identical, and (provided the GM can be convinced) they can even be a mix of \ldblquote appropriate\rdblquote  and \ldblquote inappropriate\rdblquote  for the fight (a group of warriors might be aided by their able minstrel, for example). However, they don\rquote t triple enemy dice-loss unless the \i entire team\i0  is equally inappropriate (which means the players get to explain to the GM exactly how a Hairdresser, a Parakeet Trainer, and a Life Coach are coordinating their talents to take Darth Viraxis to the mat)!\par
Whenever a team loses a round of combat, a \i single\i0  team-member\rquote s Clich\'e9 is reduced. Any team-member (Team Leader included) may \ldblquote step forward\rdblquote  and voluntarily suffer this loss. If so, the noble volunteer is reduced by \i twice\i0  the normal amount (either two dice or six, depending), but the Team Leader gets to roll \i twice as many dice on his next attack,\i0  a temporary boost as the team avenges their heroic comrade. If no volunteer steps forward, the Team Leader must assign the (undoubled) hit to a team-member, and there is no \ldblquote vengeance\rdblquote  bonus.\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\fi-144\li144\ri144\sb72\sl300\slmult1 Victory & Defeat:\b0  With teams as with individuals, the victor determines the fate of the loser \'85 but when the loser is part of a team, his fate is generally reserved until the \i end\i0  of the team\rquote s existence (even if he\rquote s defeated while the fight rages on). So, if his team \i wins,\i0  his team \endash  not their opponent \endash  gets to decide. There are some fights where this won\rquote t be so, where the PCs are under such precarious circumstance that their fates must be resolved immediately. But, in most cases, being part of a team \endash  especially a \i winning\i0  team \endash  is excellent insurance.\par
\pard\hyphpar0\fi-144\li144\ri144\sb14\sl300\slmult1\b Disbanding:\b0  A team may voluntarily disband at any time between die-rolls. When disbanding, each team-member instantly loses a single die from the Clich\'e9 they\rquote d been contributing to the team (equal to \ldblquote damage\rdblquote  suffered in the fight itself). Disbanded team-members may freely form new teams, provided the die-loss from disbanding doesn\rquote t defeat them. Individuals may also \i drop out\i0  of a team, but this reduces them to zero dice immediately as they scamper for the rear. Their fates rest on the mercy of whoever wins the fight!\b\par
Lost Leader:\b0  If the Team Leader ever leaves the team for any reason (either by dropping out or having his own Clich\'e9 dropped to zero), the team \i must\i0  disband immediately, with consequences as above. They may immediately opt to reform as a new team (with a new leader) however, and if the old leader was removed by having volunteered for personal damage, the new Team Leader gets the double-roll vengeance bonus to avenge his predecessor!\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Single-Action Conflicts\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16\ldblquote Combat\rdblquote  depends on multi-round jockeying and wearing each other down \'85 but many conflicts are too \i sudden\i0  to be played that way (two characters grabbing for the same gun, for example). Such \ldblquote Single-Action Conflicts\rdblquote  (SACs) are settled with a single roll against appropriate Clich\'e9s (or inappropriate Clich\'e9s, with good roleplaying). High roll wins. Note that, in nearly \i any\i0  case, the Game Master may jump between the three resolution methods (Target Number, Combat, Single-Action Conflict) to suit the pacing and mood. Sometimes, an arm-wrestling match works best as a combat \'85 sometimes it works best as a Single-Action Conflict, and sometimes (preferably if it\rquote s against some kind of coin-operated arm-wrestling machine) even as a simple Target Number.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 When Somebody Can\rquote t Participate\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 Sometimes, characters find themselves facing a Combat or Single-Action Conflict where they simply have no applicable Clich\'e9, even by stretching the imagination. Perhaps one character in the party enters a pie-eating contest with his Disgusting Glutton (2) Clich\'e9, but the rest of the characters are astronauts or accountants, neither of whom traditionally engorge themselves on pie. In situations like this, the GM might grant \i everybody\i0  two free \ldblquote brevet dice\rdblquote  to play with for the duration of the conflict. This means the Disgusting Glutton (2) would become, temporarily, a Disgusting Glutton (4), while everyone else would get a Regular Person Talked Into a Pie-Eating Contest (2) Clich\'e9 \ldblquote on loan\rdblquote  until the last crumb burps forth. The Glutton, naturally, retains his winning edge, but everyone else can still bury their noses in pie. This rule applies only to Combats and SACs, never to rolls against Target Numbers (since, with Target Numbers, the TN itself simply moves wherever it needs to, for \i any\i0  Clich\'e9 attempting \i any\i0  action).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\s2\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Advanced Option: Lucky Shots\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 This option allows players to spend some of their 10 starting dice on something \i other\i0  than Clich\'e9s. A single Clich\'e9-die can, instead, buy three \i Lucky Shots\i0  (spend two dice for six Lucky Shots, and so on).\i  \i0 Using a Lucky Shot boosts any Clich\'e9 roll by a \i single\i0  die, for a \i single \i0 die-roll. Lucky Shots \ldblquote reset\rdblquote  between game-sessions. Lucky Shots can represent random good luck, the favor of a deity, a streak of resourcefulness, etc.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Advanced Option: Hooks & Tales\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 With this Advanced Option, players can bargain for extra character-creation dice by giving their character a Hook and/or a Tale. A \i Hook\i0  is some significant character flaw \endash  a curse, an obsession, a weakness, a sworn vow, a permanently crippling injury \endash  that the GM agrees is \i so juicy\i0  that he can use it to make the character\rquote s life more interesting (which usually means less pleasant). A character with a Hook gets an extra die to play with.\par
A \i Tale\i0  is a written \ldblquote biography\rdblquote  of the character describing his life before the events of the game. The Tale needn\rquote t be long (a page or two is \i plenty\i0 ); it just needs to tell the reader where the character is coming from, what he likes and dislikes, how he became who he is, what his motives are. Some Tales are best written from the player\rquote s omniscient perspective; others are more fun if written as excerpts from the character\rquote s own diary. A character with a Tale provided before gameplay begins gets an extra die to play with.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Advanced Option: Pumps\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 Characters may \i pump\i0  their Clich\'e9s, expending extra effort at the cost of certain injury (loss of dice). A pumped Clich\'e9 receives a dice-boost lasting a single round of combat (or single significant roll, otherwise). After that round or roll is resolved, the Clich\'e9 returns to normal, then suffers immediate dice-loss \i equal\i0  to the boost. Such loss is comparable to combat losses, and must heal.\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\li86\ri144\sb86\sl300\slmult1 Example:\b0  Rudolph the Ninja (3) is attacked by a Monster (6)! Rudy doesn\rquote t have much of a chance against such a powerful foe, so he opts for a tricky tactic: since the Monster is attacking physically, Rudolph decides his first-round response will use his skills as a Cajun Chef (3) \endash  a decidedly \i Inappropriate\i0  choice! He also opts to \i pump it by two dice\i0  to Cajun Chef (5), putting his all into his cooking!\par
On round one, the Monster rolls six dice, and Rudy (quickly whipping up a tempting Gumbo spiked with Ninja sleeping drug and offering it to the Monster) rolls five. If the Ninja loses, he\rquote s instantly defeated: his Cajun Chef Clich\'e9 would drop to Cajun Chef (1) for the pump, then to Cajun Chef (zero) for losing the round. The Monster would eat Rudolph instead of the Gumbo. If the Ninja \i wins,\i0  however, the Monster (6) drops to Monster (3), and Rudy\rquote s Cajun Chef (3) drops to Cajun Chef (1). In round two, Rudolph can switch back to Ninja (3), where he\rquote ll be on equal footing with the groggy, well-fed Monster.\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1 Pumps are legal for any kind of Clich\'e9 roll, provided the GM agrees that \ldblquote pushing it\rdblquote  fits the action involved.\b\par
Double-Pump Clich\'e9s:\b0  If permitting pumps, the GM might also allow \i double-pump Clich\'e9s,\i0  which take only \ldblquote half damage\rdblquote  from pumping. Thus, a Sorcerer [5] could roll eleven dice for a single combat round (six extra dice!) but take only \i three\i0  dice of loss from the extra effort. Double-pump Clich\'e9s cost twice as many dice to buy during character creation, and are especially appropriate for Clich\'e9s representing supernatural abilities (in fact, some Game Masters may \i require\i0  that supernatural Clich\'e9s be purchased this way). The use of [square brackets] instead of (parentheses) indicates a double-pump Clich\'e9.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Advanced Option: Character Advancement\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\b0\fs16 At the end of each adventure, each player rolls against each Clich\'e9 \i challenged\i0  during the course of play (ignore lingering \ldblquote injuries\rdblquote  for this purpose; roll as if the Clich\'e9 were \i whole\i0 ). If the dice land showing \i only even numbers,\i0  the Clich\'e9 advances by a single die (increasing it permanently). No Clich\'e9 advances past Clich\'e9 (6).\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\fi-144\li144\ri144\sb72\sl300\slmult1 Midgame Leaps:\b0  Anytime you do something \i really, really, really spectacularly entertaining that wows the whole table,\i0  the GM may allow you to roll instantly (in the middle of the game) for possible advancement, in addition to the roll(s) at the end of the adventure.\b\par
\pard\hyphpar0\fi-144\li144\ri144\sb14\sl300\slmult1 Adding New Clich\'e9s:\b0  There may come a time when a character has grown and matured enough to justify adding an entirely \i new\i0  Clich\'e9 to his character sheet. If the player and GM \i agree\i0  this is the case, \i and\i0  agree on what the new Clich\'e9 is, the player rolls for advancement as usual, but new dice earned for that adventure may be put toward the new Clich\'e9 instead of the ones that earned them. This can also be applied to \ldblquote in-game\rdblquote  improvements, if the situation warrants it!\b\par
Long-Haul Variant:\b0  Instead of rolling against \i every\i0  challenged Clich\'e9, roll against a \i single\i0  Clich\'e9 of your choice.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\hyphpar0\sb96\sa48\sl240\slmult1\b\fs28 Credit Where It\rquote s Due\i\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb86\sl300\slmult1\fs16 Risus\b0\i0  grew from inspirations provided by the sadly out-of-print classic, \b\i Ghostbusters\b0\i0  (1st Edition, West End Games), sparked against an idea from Mayfair\rquote s \b\i DC Heroes\b0\i0 . Other noteworthy influences have included \b\i GURPS, TWERPS, Fudge, Tunnels & Trolls, Over the Edge,\b0\i0  and\b\i  DragonQuest. \b0\i0 The list of \i people\i0  on whom \b\i Risus\b0\i0  depends is too long to even contemplate in a space so tiny, but I\rquote d be remiss if I didn\rquote t mention a few of them: Guy Hoyle, Spike Y. Jones, Dan \ldblquote Moose\rdblquote  Jasman, Frank J. Perricone, Jason Puckett, David Pulver, Sean \ldblquote Dr. Kromm\rdblquote  Punch, Liz Rich, Dan Suptic, Brent Wolke, Ren\'e9 Vernon, and the thousands of cool gamers, old and new, who\rquote ve populated and enlivened the \b\i Risus\b0\i0  community.\b\i\par
\pard\hyphpar0\sb173\sl300\slmult1\qc Risus: The Anything RPG\b0\i0  is S. John Ross\rquote  trademark for his Anything RPG. This is \b\i Risus\b0\i0  Version 2.01, Copyright \'a91993-2013 by S. John Ross, All Rights Reserved. Permission granted to make unlimited copies for private, non-commercial use, and remember: \i There\rquote s No Wrong Way To Play!\par
}
 